The Picture of Dorian Gray – An Aesthetic and Decadent
Experiment
Rogério Yamada
December 2021
1
Introduction
The Picture of Dorian Gray, authored by Oscar Wilde (1854-1900) during the Victorian Era (1837-
1901), is a work of literature that brings much of Wilde’s own life principles taken to overwhelming
extremes, principles that challenged the established values of his time. The purpose of this essay is
to explore a few aspects of Wilde’s only novel in four parts.
The first part provides an introduction to two artistic movements that influenced Wilde and indicates
a few passages where their principles are made apparent.
The second part analyses how the roles of three of the main characters of the novel are related to
each other and how this relationship affects the story.
In the third part, evidence of the presence of a few Gothic motifs in the novel is provided.
The last part is dedicated to final considerations.
2
Aestheticism and Decadence
As once said by Wilde himself, “I am so glad you like that strange coloured book of mine – it contains
much of me in it” (Hackett, 2014), his novel The Picture of Dorian Gray expressed much of his
own beliefs and lifestyle. Two closely related movements that strongly influenced Wilde established
principles that defied many of the Victorian traditional values and that, controversially, many of their
supporters adopted as guiding principles for life (Burdett, 2014): Aestheticism and Decadence.
The traditional society of the Victorian Era strongly believed that literature and art were vehicles
of ethical values and, therefore, were expected to inspire people with models of appropriate social
behaviour. According to Burdett (2014), Aestheticism, whose motto was ‘art for the sake of art’,
flourished in the 1860s/1870s and its supporters argued that art had nothing to do with morality and
maintained that its purpose lay on the pure pursuit of beauty. Wilde regarded his own life as his work
of art in justification for his flamboyant lifestyle – the famous statement “Life imitates Art far more
than Life imitates Art” is attributed to him.
Decadence shares its origins with Aestheticism to some extent.
According to Burdett (2014), in
relation to art and literature, this movement included features such as “[. . . ] the notion of intense
refinement; the valuing of artificiality over nature; a position of ennui or boredom rather than of moral
1

earnestness or the valuing of hard work; an interest in perversity and paradox, and in transgressive
modes of sexuality.”. Burdett (2014) also explains that a decadent movement fiction, À Rebours
(1884), by the French writer Joris-Karl Huysmans, is believed to be the notorious ‘yellow book’ that
fascinates Dorian Gray in Oscar Wilde’s novel. This has been, nonetheless, denied by Wilde: “The
book that poisoned, or made perfect, Dorian Gray, does not exist: it is a fancy of mine merely.”
(Hackett, 2014).
The Picture of Dorian Gray reflects many of the qualities of these movements sometimes taken to
their extremes. In the following passage, Dorian Gray comments about Lord Henry’s teachings:
I remembered what you had said to me on that wonderful evening when we first dined
together, about the search for beauty being the real secret of life. (Wilde, 2017, p. 22)
The concept of art subverting life appears in this passage where Lord Henry states that Sibyl Vane’s
art was greater than her as a human being and justifies Dorian Gray’s first sin.
She has played her last part. [. . . ] The girl never really lived, and so she has never really
died. [. . . ] Mourn for Ophelia, if you like. Put ashes on your head because Cordelia was
strangled. Cry out against Heaven because the daughter of Brabantio died. But don’t
waste your tears over Sibyl Vane. She was less real than they are. (Wilde, 2017, p. 46)
3
The roles of Basil, Lord Henry and Dorian
In his works, including The Picture of Dorian Gray, Wilde often employed characters that were
instances of himself representing different components of an argument (The Picture of Dorian Gray
Study Guide | Course Hero, n.d.).
This was also admitted by Wilde in a letter he wrote: “I am so glad you like that strange coloured
book of mine – it contains much of me in it – Basil Hallward is what I think I am; Lord Henry what
the world thinks of me; Dorian what I would like to be – in other ages perhaps.” (Hackett, 2014).
Analysing from this point of view, these three characters maintain a fundamental relationship with
each other around which the story is developed. They bear a certain degree of similarity, especially
the fact that they keep bonds of sensual, egoistic love among them. Interestingly, they seem not
to care about each other’s true well-being, instead, they feel attracted by the sense of pleasure one
provokes on another – a sort of selfish, obsessive attachment. Although characterised as friends in
the novel, they could rather be regarded as interdependent slaves of sensory pleasures.
Basil Hallward, “the creator of beautiful things” (Wilde, 2017, The Preface), is the artist who captures
the unspoilt soul of young Dorian and expresses its pure beauty into the portrait in such a perfect
manner that Dorian Gray, as expressed in the portrait, becomes the essence of his art and, therefore,
of his life. As Wilde would be, Basil is aware that the homosexual nature of his passion for Dorian’s
immaculate expression could harm his reputation if made public.
But I know that as I worked at it, every flake and film of colour seemed to me to reveal
my secret. I grew afraid that others would know of my idolatry. I felt, Dorian, that I had
told too much, that I had put too much of myself into it. (Wilde, 2017, p. 52)
2

Basil is enslaved by Dorian’s original beauty – here, there is a trace of Aestheticism. As a consequence,
he grows jealous of anyone who approaches Dorian and loses his mind when he learns about rumours
of Dorian’s horrible actions: “Deny them, Dorian, deny them! Can’t you see what I am going through?
My God! don’t tell me that you are bad, and corrupt, and shameful.” (Wilde, 2017, p. 69).
Lord Henry is a dandy who incorporates much of Wilde’s behavioural traits. He is eloquent, charming
and highly convincing, nevertheless, cynic and poisonous. Dorian, though, falls into his enchantment
rather consciously – he is aware of Harry’s intoxicating influence. While Basil was the creator of
the forever pure Dorian, Lord Henry was the one who taught Dorian the ways of vice. As could be
expected, Lord Henry’s intentions towards Dorian have never been pure – Dorian was nothing more
than an extraordinary living experiment for him.
He was pleased by it. It made him a more interesting study. [. . . ] There were poisons so
subtle that to know their properties one had to sicken of them. There were maladies so
strange that one had to pass through them if one sought to understand their nature. [. . . ]
To a large extent the lad was his own creation. He had made him premature. (Wilde,
2017, p. 25-26)
Seduced by Dorian’s perfection, Lord Henry perhaps kept wondering what would become of the one
who “have drunk deeply of everything” (Wilde, 2017, p. 98). While he kept his full attention on Dorian,
given the latter’s extraordinary potential, he lost his interest in Basil when he noticed a decline in
his art. And then he coldly dismisses someone who was supposed to be his Oxford old friend. Here,
Lord Henry again impersonates Wilde’s beliefs that art was above life – in a rather extreme manner,
though.
But let us pass from poor Basil. I wish I could believe that he had come to such a really
romantic end as you suggest, but I can’t. I dare say he fell into the Seine off an omnibus
and that the conductor hushed up the scandal. Yes: I should fancy that was his end. I see
him lying now on his back under those dull-green waters, with the heavy barges floating
over him and long weeds catching in his hair. Do you know, I don’t think he would have
done much more good work. During the last ten years his painting had gone off very
much. [. . . ] “Yes,” he continued, turning round and taking his handkerchief out of his
pocket; “his painting had quite gone off. It seemed to me to have lost something. It had
lost an ideal. When you and he ceased to be great friends, he ceased to be a great artist.
What was it separated you? (Wilde, 2017, p. 96-97)
Dorian Gray, in turn, is the one who has been magically granted access to sensual pleasures to an
extent never before imagined. If Dorian was someone Wilde would like to be, we could imagine Wilde
considering: ‘What if I could experience whatever kind of wild pleasures to the fullest extent free from
any moral restraints? Where would I end up?’
Eternal youth, infinite passion, pleasures subtle and secret, wild joys and wilder sins – he
was to have all these things. The portrait was to bear the burden of his shame: that was
all. [. . . ] This portrait would be to him the most magical of mirrors. As it had revealed
to him his own body, so it would reveal to him his own soul. (Wilde, 2017, p. 47-48)
Not only did Wilde give Dorian a magical portrait but he also magically freed Dorian from any threat.
3

Made into the subject of a decadent experiment, Dorian paradoxically met self-destruction by avoiding
destruction at all costs.
There was only one bit of evidence left against him. The picture itself – that was evidence.
He would destroy it. (Wilde, 2017, p. 100)
It is arguable that Wilde’s voice could be heard through his characters, especially Lord Henry. The
following passages present statements followed by the sentence ‘That is all’, which is a construction
Wilde uses in the preface of the novel.
Wilde: “There is no such thing as a moral or an immoral book. Books are well written,
or badly written. That is all.” (Wilde, 2017, The Preface, emphasis added)
Lord Henry: “Conscience and cowardice are really the same things, Basil. Conscience is
the trade-name of the firm. That is all.” (Wilde, 2017, p. 3, emphasis added)
Dorian: “I felt all that you have said, but somehow I was afraid of it, and I could not
express it to myself. How well you know me! But we will not talk again of what has
happened.
It has been a marvellous experience.
That is all.”
(Wilde, 2017, p. 47,
emphasis added)
Basil: “Art is always more abstract than we fancy. Form and colour tell us of form and
colour – that is all.” (Wilde, 2017, p. 52, emphasis added)
Lord Henry: The books that the world calls immoral are books that show the world its
own shame. That is all. (Wilde, 2017, p. 98, emphasis added)
4
Gothic elements
Considering the key Gothic motifs explored by Bowen (2014), it is possible to identify a few of them
in The Picture of Dorian Gray:
• Strange places: The decaying schoolroom where Dorian concealed his portrait:
Hallward glanced round him with a puzzled expression. The room looked as if it
had not been lived in for years. A faded Flemish tapestry, a curtained picture, an
old Italian cassone, and an almost empty book-case – that was all that it seemed to
contain, besides a chair and a table. As Dorian Gray was lighting a half-burned candle
that was standing on the mantelshelf, he saw that the whole place was covered with
dust and that the carpet was in holes. A mouse ran scuffling behind the wainscoting.
There was a damp odour of mildew. (Wilde, 2017, p. 69)
• Power and constraint: Sibyl Vane – a woman in vulnerable position subjected to Dorian Gray’s
cruelty:
She crouched on the floor like a wounded thing, and Dorian Gray, with his beautiful
eyes, looked down at her, and his chiselled lips curled in exquisite disdain. (Wilde,
2017, p. 40)
4

• A world of doubt: According to Bowen (2014), Gothic seeks to create in our minds the
possibility that there may be things beyond human power, reason and knowledge. One piece of
evidence of this can be seen at the moment Dorian’s portrait mysteriously becomes a mirror of
his soul:
He had uttered a mad wish that he himself might remain young, and the portrait
grow old; that his own beauty might be untarnished, and the face on the canvas bear
the burden of his passions and his sins; that the painted image might be seared with
the lines of suffering and thought, and that he might keep all the delicate bloom and
loveliness of his then just conscious boyhood. Surely his wish had not been fulfilled?
Such things were impossible. It seemed monstrous even to think of them. And, yet,
there was the picture before him, with the touch of cruelty in the mouth. (Wilde,
2017, p. 41)
5
Final considerations
Wilde was charged with ‘gross indecency’ and it is curious that he had provided evidence against
himself at his trial through his novel The Picture of Dorian Gray. But if insatiable satisfaction of
sensual pleasures is the pathway to degeneration, what to say about the insatiable crave of today’s
business world for financial results? What is morality if not a social convention?
In his way, Wilde tried to say that art must not be an instrument to impose the identities and
conventions of the mainstream of the society upon the rest of the society. Perhaps, through his
unconventional lifestyle, he tried to demonstrate that our art is supposed to be our identity, as
complex and varied as our life.
References
Bowen, J. (2014, May). Gothic motifs - The British Library. https://www.bl.uk/romantics-and-
victorians/articles/gothic-motifs.
Burdett,
C.
(2014,
March).
Aestheticism
and
decadence
-
The
British
Library.
https://www.bl.uk/romantics-and-victorians/articles/aestheticism-and-decadence.
Hackett, A.
(2014, June).
Your handwriting fascinates me and your praise charms me.
https://natlib.govt.nz/blog/posts/your-handwriting-fascinates-me-and-your-praise-charms-
me.
The Picture of Dorian Gray Study Guide | Course Hero. (n.d.). https://www.coursehero.com/lit/The-
Picture-of-Dorian-Gray/.
Wilde, O. (2017). The Picture of Dorian Gray. Seattle: AmazonClassics.
5
